My friend Scott calls these chapters “one of the greatest bits of writing he has ever encountered.”  He’s not wrong.

For all the years I’ve heard about this book, people have described it as a biography, as a book about politics, a book about power, a book about city planning, and a book about cities. Here’s where it all comes together, in a triumphant chapter that, if you only read part of this book, is the one to read.

Caro’s flexing his muscles with this chapter, writing about New York and its neighborhoods in such an impressive fashion. Earlier, when I quoted Caro describing how to “understand” a neighborhood? This is exhibit A. He puts readers in East Tremont, hangs Moses’ meat ax over their heads, and slowly brings it down in crushing dramatic fashion.

He personifies the neighborhood with Mrs. Lilian Edelstein, an unforgettable character who becomes the neighborhood’s strongest activist. There are Lillians in every city, so there’s some familiarity for anyone who has ever worked in a city. In this instance, the evidence that she is on the side of angels is so overwhelming, that it’s impossible not to root for her and against Moses. Caro has picked the perfect circumstance to illustrate the entire thesis of the book. It’s brilliant, really. And after Scott pointed it out, it’s hard not to see the entire book as leading up to this one chapter about one mile in one neighborhood.

For recap purposes, Moses is building the Cross-Bronx Expressway, and runs it directly through a neighborhood called East Tremont. He has several other and much better options, but even when confronted with the fact the better options exist, Moses refuses to bend. The neighbors assemble, fight and fight, and Moses wins, destroying the fabric of a neighborhood in the process. Moses loses a few battles in the process, but as always, wins the war. He overpowers Mayor Wagner and various other political actors, and his will is worked. Again.

Caro weaves into this chapter, as he has done intermittently, his direct interviews with Moses, referring to himself as the author. The description Moses offers of why a certain player in the Cross-Bronx debate changed his mind is eerily reminiscent of a scene from The Godfather, where Luca Brazi tells someone that either his brains or his signature would be on a certain piece of paper. The comparison is jarring. (And I’ll observe that these Caro cameos in the book are excellent–he uses them sparingly but perfectly.)

At the end of the main chapter, after the emotional turmoil of seeing Lillian, your neighbor and mine, lose to Moses, Caro smacks us with his own ax: the presumed truth about why Moses chose to route the Cross-Bronx the way he did. And it’s rooted in a political decision not to mess with a crappy little but terminal that was a convergence of Bronx political interests.

source: https://somuchtoread.wordpress.com/the-power-broker/